# Table of Contents

- I.1. Closure
- I.2. Asynchronous JavaScript

# JavaScript Principles

JavaScript is a single-threaded language, which means it can only execute one task at a time. It's engine processes code sequentially, executing one statement at a time in the order they appear in the code. This single-threaded execution model is one of the main reasons JavaScript relies heavily on asynchronous programming techniques like callbacks, promises, and async/await.

The thread of execution in JavaScript can be broken down into several components:

- Call Stack
- Execution Context
- Event Loop
- Message Queue

In details:

- **Call Stack:** The call stack keeps track of all the functions that are currently being executed, in what is known as a Last-In-First-Out (LIFO) order. When the execution of script begins, the JavaScript engine initially creates a global execution context and adds a `global() function` to the top of the stack. Every time a function is `invoked`, it is added to the top of the stack. Every time a function `evaluates` and completes it's execution, it is removed from the stack. The call stack keeps track of the execution context, allowing the JavaScript engine to know which function to execute currently (whichever function is top of the call stack) and where to return after the execution.
- **Execution Context:** an abstract concept representing the environment in which the currently executing code is running. There are three types of execution contexts: global, function, and eval. These contexts hold information about variables, functions, and the value of `this` keyword. They are managed by the JavaScript engine using a call stack.
- **Event Loop:** The event loop is responsible for handling asynchronous callbacks. It continuously checks the message queue for any pending callbacks that need to be executed. If the call stack is empty and there is a callback in the message queue, the event loop pushes the callback onto the call stack and starts executing it. The event loop ensures that JavaScript remains responsive even when executing long-running tasks by allowing the engine to execute other tasks (such as handling user input or running timers) while waiting for an asynchronous operation to complete.
- **Message Queue:** The message queue is a data structure that stores callbacks waiting to be executed. Callbacks from asynchronous functions like setTimeout, XMLHttpRequest, or user events (click, keypress, etc.) are placed in the message queue. The event loop processes these callbacks in the order they were added to the queue (First-In-First-Out).

In summary, JavaScript has a single-threaded execution model, with a call stack to manage the execution context, an event loop to handle asynchronous callbacks, and a message queue to store pending callbacks. This model allows JavaScript to handle complex tasks efficiently while maintaining responsiveness.

#### Example

A basic program

```js
const celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria = 31;
const celsiusTemperatureInUSA = 25;

function celsiusToFahrenheit(celsius) {
  const fahrenheit = (celsius * 9) / 5 + 32;
  return fahrenheit;
}

const fahrenheitTemperatureInBulgaria = celsiusToFahrenheit(
  celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria
);
const fahrenheitTemperatureInUSA = celsiusToFahrenheit(celsiusTemperatureInUSA);

console.log(
  `The temperature in Bulgaria of ${celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria}째C is equal to ${fahrenheitTemperatureInBulgaria}째F.`
);
console.log(
  `The temperature in USA of ${celsiusTemperatureInUSA}째C is equal to ${fahrenheitTemperatureInUSA}째F.`
);
```

**Basic Explanation**
When JavaScript code runs, it:

- Goes through the code line-by-line and runs (executes) each line, known as the `thread of execution`
- Saves "data" like strings and arrays, to be used later, in it's `memory`. (We can even save a function's code)

**Basic Breakdown**

- Step 1: The engine creates a `global execution context` for the top-level script, which is our example `a basic program`.
- Step 2: In the first line of code, we declared a `const` variable with identifier `celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria` and assigned it the value `31`, so the engine initializes the variable in memory.

  - the memory looks like this:

  ```
  {
      celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria: 31
  }
  ```

- Step 3: In the second line of code, we declared another `const` variable with identifier `celsiusTemperatureInUSA` and assigned it the value `25`, so the engine initializes the variable in memory.

  - the memory looks like this

  ```
  {
      celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria: 31
      celsiusTemperatureInUSA: 25
  }
  ```

- Step 4: In the third line of code, we declared a function with identifier `celsiusToFahrenheit` and assigned it value, technically called `function body`.

  - the memory looks like this

  ```
  {
      celsiusTemperatureInBulgaria: 31,
      celsiusTemperatureInUSA: 25,
      celsiusToFahrenheit: function celsiusToFahrenheit(celsius) {
          const fahrenheit = (celsius * 9/5) + 32;
          return fahrenheit;
      }
  }
  ```

- Step 5: In the next statement, we declared a `const` variable with identifier `fahrenheitTemperatureInBulgaria` and the engine doesn't know yet what to store in memory, because we assigned a `function call`, which must first be processed.
- Step 6: The engine `invokes` the function with identifier `fahrenheitTemperatureInBulgaria`, which creates a local `function execution context` and passes the parameter `celsius`, with the value `31`, which is technically called an argument. Next the `thread of execution` processes the code and returns in the `global execution context`, where the function `evaluates` to the value `87.8`

### I.1. Closure

The term "closure" is a well-established and widely recognized concept in computer science and programming languages, including JavaScript.

In JavaScript, closure is a powerful concept that allows functions to retain access to variables from their parent scope even after the parent function has finished executing. It is created when an inner function references variables from its outer function.

The mechanics of closure are as follows:

- When we declare a function and declare a variable inside that function, this variable enters the **Variable Environment**, which is a part of the function's execution context
- Next we declare a nested function inside the same function, this nested function also enters the **Variable Environment**
- Since the inner function is in the scope of the outer function, it can operate on the same variables declared in the outer function. For closure to occur, two things need to happen:
  - The inner function must have code that uses the data in the variable
  - The inner function must be returned outside of the outer function's scope
- When the parent function is invoked, and after the code is evaluated, all returned nested functions will **"close over"** and retain access to the variables and scope of their containing function via the **Lexical Environment**. This mechanic is known as **Closed Over "Variable Environment"**
  - The **Lexical Environment** is a data structure that holds identifiers like variables and function names. Each time a function is invoked, a new Lexical Environment is created in memory and associated with that function to hold the local variables within that scope. When an inner function references variables from its containing (outer) function, it effectively "closes over" the Lexical Environment of the outer function. This means that the inner function retains a reference to the entire Lexical Environment.
  - When we return the nested function outside, we can still use the data of the parent function because it becomes a **Persistent Lexical Scope Referenced Data**

##### Example

```javascript
function outer() {
  let counter = 0;
  function incrementCounter() {
    return counter++;
  }

  return incrementCounter;
}

const myFunc = outer();
console.log(myFunc()); // 0
console.log(myFunc()); // 1
console.log(myFunc()); // 2
console.log(myFunc()); // 3
```

Closures are not unique to JavaScript; they exist in various programming languages that support nested functions and lexical scoping. They provide a powerful way to achieve encapsulation, data privacy, and the creation of functions with state. By understanding closure, you can leverage its benefits in JavaScript, such as creating private variables, function factories, and handling asynchronous operations effectively.

### I.2. Asynchronous JavaScript

JavaScript is a single-threaded language that follows an event-driven and non-blocking concurrency model.

Its key components for managing asynchronous operations are:

- Call Stack
- Browser Web APIs
- Event Loop
- Callback Queue
- Microtask Queue

The order of execution is as follows:
1. **Call Stack:** All synchronous code is executed first. The call stack pops all functions until it reaches **global()**
2. **Microtask Queue:** All callbacks from the microtask queue are executed. 
    - **Promise callbacks:** Callbacks registered using **.then()**, **.catch()**, or **.finally()** on Promises are executed as microtasks, ensuring that Promise-related tasks have higher priority than regular tasks in the event queue.
    - **process.nextTick() callbacks:** In Node.js, the **process.nextTick()** method is often used to schedule a callback to be executed in the microtask queue.
3. **Callback Queue** - Once the microtask queue is empty, the event loop processes all callbacks from the regular task queue.
    - **User Interface Events:** User interactions with the web page, such as clicks, keyboard input, and mouse movements, are handled in the event queue.
    - **Timer Events:** Events generated by **setTimeout** and **setInterval** functions, which execute their callback functions after a specified delay.
    - **Document Object Model (DOM) Events:** Events triggered by changes in the DOM, like element creations, modifications, or removals.

#### I.2.1. Timer Events
The mechanics are as follows:

- When the JavaScript runtime begins executing your code, the **thread of execution** first parses and executes all synchronous code, line by line, from top to bottom. Initially when code execution begins, the **call stack** contains only the `global()` function and as we progress through the code, each time we encounter a function, a **new frame** is added to the top of the **call stack**, and when it completes, that frame is removed.
- As soon as the JavaScript engine encounters an asynchronous operation, like **setTimeout** from the **Browser Web APIs**, it schedules it as a **task** in the **Browser** and then continues executing the remaining synchronous code.
  - The Browser, implemented in C++, is responsible for handling these asynchronous tasks. For example, in the case of `setTimeout`, the Browser sets a timer for the specified delay duration and keeps track of when the timer should fire. While the timer is counting down, the JavaScript engine continues executing synchronous code in its thread of execution, ensuring that the application remains responsive and doesn't freeze while waiting for timers or other asynchronous operations to complete. Eventually the timer reaches 0 (or the specified delay) and the Browser moves the `setTimeout` callback to the **callback queue**, where it sits in **pending** status until called.
- After the JavaScript engine executes <u>all initial synchronous</u> code that's on the **call stack**, it reaches a point where there are no more synchronous tasks to execute. At this point, the **event loop** comes into play. It starts its <u>first check</u> to see if there are any pending tasks in the **callback queue**. The event loop checks the following in each iteration:
  - Is there anything currently running on the call stack? If yes, the loop does nothing and waits for the stack to become empty, otherwise it checks if there are any **pending** tasks in the **callback queue**.
  - If there are, it picks the next task from the queue and pushes it onto the stack for execution.

In summary, the event loop's first check occurs after the initial synchronous code execution and after any asynchronous tasks have been scheduled. Eventually even more asyncronous tasks may appear pending in the **callback queue**, so the event loop iterates constantly. However its an event loop, not a for-loop, so its being notified when to iterate, in a manner how a game engine runs their game loop.

Those mechanics ensure that asynchronous tasks are eventually executed in the correct order, after all synchronous code.

##### Example

```javascript
function printHello() {
  console.log("Hello!");
}
// blocks the thread for 1 second, using a busy-waiting loop
function blockFor1Sec() {
  const start = Date.now();
  let now = start;

  while (now - start < 1000) {
    now = Date.now();
  }

  console.log("Blocked for 1 second");
}

setTimeout(printHello, 0);
blockFor1Sec();
console.log("Me first!");
```

##### Output

```
Blocked for 1 second
Me first!
Hello!
```

#### I.2.2. Promises
The mechanics are as follows:

##### Example

```javascript
function display(data) {
    console.log(data);
}
function printHello() {
  console.log("Hello!");
}
// blocks the thread for 10 seconds, using a busy-waiting loop
function blockFor10Sec() {
  const start = Date.now();
  let now = start;

  while (now - start < 10000) {
    now = Date.now();
  }

  console.log("Blocked for 10 seconds");
}

setTimeout(printHello, 0);

const promise = fetch("https://swapi.dev/api/planets/1/");
promise.then(display);

blockFor10Sec();
console.log("Me first!");
```

##### Output

```
Blocked for 1 second
Me first!
Hello!
Response: {}
```

#### Literature

Asynchronous JavaScript - https://jakearchibald.com/2015/tasks-microtasks-queues-and-schedules/
