# Table of Contents

- I. Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)
- II. Typography

## II. Typography

### Type Faces

Personal Recommendations:

- Best Typefaces for Reading Text
  - Inter
  - IBM Plex Sans

### FOUT (Flash of Unstyled Text)

When a web page is loading, there is a brief moment where text is displayed in a default or fallback font before it's styled with the intended custom web font. This transition from unstyled text to the desired font can be noticeable and potentially disruptive to the user experience.

We will always get this problem when we use **Custom Web Fonts**.

- FOUT occurs when web fonts are being loaded asynchronously, or from a remote server (e.g. fonts.adobe.com, fonts.google.com) and there's a delay in font availability.
- FOUT also occurs even if we install the font on the user's own computer, no matter if its system installed, or application installed.

I know of 3 techniques, which needs to be applied in combination to mitigate this problem:

**1. Locally-installed font:** Installing the font-face locally will enable us to avoid sending a network request for fonts. I have not found a good `npm` package for JavaScript projects, so I prefer to download and install the font-face manualy.

Define each `@font-face`, linking to a font-face file, inside a global `index.css` file.

```
@font-face {
  font-family: "Inter";
  font-style: normal;
  font-weight: 400;
  font-display: swap;
  src:
    /* Super Modern Browsers */
    url(".src/assets/fonts/Inter/inter-regular.woff2") format("woff2"),
    /* Modern Browsers */
    url(".src/assets/fonts/Inter/inter-regular.woff") format("woff"),
    /* Safari, Android, iOS */
    url(".src/assets/fonts/Inter/inter-regular.ttf") format("truetype");
}
```

**2. Use the `font-display` property**
By using the `font-display` property, you can tailor the font loading behavior to suit your design and user experience requirements, balancing the need for immediate text rendering with the desire to use custom fonts for styling.

Consider the following values:

- `swap`: This value tells the browser to use a fallback font (system font or specified fallback) while the custom font is being downloaded. Once the custom font is available, it will be swapped in. This provides a smoother user experience because text is immediately styled with the fallback font, and then it's switched to the custom font when ready.
  - For **Langing Pages**, this is currently I prefer, in combination with other techniques. So **Locally-installed font** + `font-display: swap;` + **HTML Resource Preload**

**3. HTML Resource Preload**
By using the `rel="preload"` attribute in your HTML to preload your custom fonts, You can tell the browser to start fetching the font files early in the loading process, reducing the delay when the font is needed.

Lets assume the font-face files are in the `./src/assets/fonts` directory, we can set up the link element like this:

In file `index.html`
```
<link rel="preload" as="font" type="font/woff2" href="./src/assets/fonts/custom-font.woff2" crossorigin="anonymous" />
```
