
### JavaScript
#### 01. Context vs Redux

**What is Context?**
Context API is a Dependency Injection mechanism. It doesn't "manage" anything, instead it transports data down the React component tree to be accessed by children components. Any "state management", if you would like such, is handled by you, typically via `useState/useReducer`.

**What is Redux**
Redux is a battle tested state management library, deriving ideas from the "Flux Architecture", a pattern first suggested by Facebook in 2014, a year after React came out. Redux itself is UI-agnostic and can be used with any UI layer (React, Vue, Angular, vanilla JS, etc), however it is mostly used with React. To use it with your selected UI layer, you need to also use "bindings library", so for React it's React-Redux, which internally uses Context API transport mechanics.

**When should you use Context?**
- Any time you have some value that you want to make accessible to a portion of your React component tree, without passing that value down as props through each level of components.
- You can have multiple contexts for multiple modules, where each module could be a complex component, with multiple children components, whith even more children components, which might require data from their parent component.
- You can have Redux for global state and Context + `useState/useReducer` for big enough modules.

**When should you use Redux?**
- You need to manage large amount of global application state, needed in many places in the app.
- You need more powerful capabilities for managing side effects, state persistence, data serialization and middlewares.

**Literature** 
https://blog.isquaredsoftware.com/2021/01/context-redux-differences/
https://blog.testdouble.com/posts/2021-03-19-react-context-for-dependency-injection-not-state/